We can identify this group of go verbs and expect them to go to ga when they are in the subjunctive or the mood tense.
So I leave from salir is
Salgo.
And if I want to tell somebody leave formally.
Salga.
And if I want to tell more than one person
Salgan.
Good.
And if I want to tell them don't leave?
No salgan.
Good.
Poner was to put.
I put
Bongo.
Good.
Let's speak formally.
Put it here.
Put it here
Lo ponka aquí.
And where does that lo go with positive commands?
Ponka loaki.
Good.
Ponga loaki.
But don't put it here
Nolopongaki.
Very good.
We saw with regular verbs.
That we have a shortcut where we don't use the mood tense for informal positive commands.
So if I want to tell you to eat, I can just say come.
I got the comes and I dropped the yes.
Come
If I want to tell you to find it, I can go to encontrar, encuentras, I can drop yes, encuentralo.
That's our shortcut for informal positive commands where we don't use the mood tense.
With these go verbs
To make that shortcut, you just drop the go.
So for example, how do you say I have from tener?
Tengo.
If you want to tell somebody informally have, you just drop the go.
Ten.
Have it.
Tenla.
Yes, ten law.
So we don't see tenka.
For formal, but we're now looking at the shortcut that we have for informal.
So how would you say have it speaking formally?
Tengalo.
But informally we're not using the moot tense.
We have a shortcut.
It's just different to the shortcut we learned before.
The shortcut is just dropping the go.
Tendlo
A nice way to remember this is how you will see people in many Spanish speaking countries answering the phone.
Either dígame formally or dime informally.
What is I come?
And how do you tell somebody formally to come?
Penga.
And now how would you make it informal?
Ben.
Then good.
So I should mention that the benga that you hear in Spain as come on is not necessarily formal.
It's lost
that feeling of formality because it's like a fixed expression.
So benga benga you hear all the time and then ben
Will sound much more like come physically come rather than come on.
Venga, venga, venga is used like come on.
What was to leave or to go out
Salir.
I leave or I go out.
Salgo.
Leave, speaking informally.
Sal.
We can just drop the go.
I say or I tell is D go.
If you want to say tell me formally, how is it?
Digame Digame if you want to make that same command informally, how will it be
Dime, dime.
Dime.
Good.
So both things you hear when people answer the phone in Spain.
Dime, dígame.
And in other countries, in other Spanish-speaking countries as well.
So for ga verbs they will go to ga to form the mood tense and for the orders the shortcut for the informal positive order they will just drop this ga.
So, if you want to say tell me when you come, speaking informally, how would that be?
Dime quando vengas.
Good.
After quando we're using the mood tense because we're referring to the future.
Dime cuando vengas.
Tell me when you come.
How would you say tell me when you do it?
And that speak formally now.
Tell me when you do it.
Speaking formally
Digame quando lo haga.
Very good.
Good.